## Overview
Over the course of my time at Southern New Hampshire University, I have learned how to program in multiple languages and using multiple technologies. The concepts I have learned have allowed me to be able to quickly and easily learn new technologies as I am exposed to them, as many times the courses required a completed project in a new and previously unused technology to be finished within eight weeks or less.

The projects I have chosen for my portfolio have been selected to broadcast a wide variety of the technologies and skills I have learned during my education. I intentionally chose projects in multiple languages, specifically Python, C++, and Java, and different formats, a web-based project, a command-line based project, and a GUI project. I also tried to include different technologies used in these projects, like OpenGL, MongoDB, Dash and Jupyter. 

The first project in this portfolio is a command-line Java application designed to manage a cruise company’s ships, routes, and passengers. The second project in this portfolio is in C++, and is a three-dimensional scene drawn using the OpenGL libraries. The third project in the portfolio is a Python webpage, designed with Dash, Jupyter, and MongoDB. 

## [Project One - Java Command Line - Cruise Ship](https://github.com/bddarwin/java-cruise-planner)

The project I chose for this milestone was the Cruise Ship project from IT-145. This project was a command-line based Java program to manage cruise ships, cruise routes, and passengers. This project was developed in April and May of 2020. The project as it was developed for that class had the basics developed for adding and displaying data, but only had basic “feature not yet implemented” messages for the edit functions. I selected this project for my ePortfolio because I wanted to show a variety of languages, and because this project had a clear path for improving, and because the project involved working with lists, which is a concept of Java that I still feel that I need to improve on.

My improvements started with adding in the edit cruise, edit ship, and edit passenger functions. These functions start by listing and prompting the user to select an entry to edit, and then prompt for new values for all the data on that entry. While editing these functions, I also modified the “Ship Names” list and the “Cruise List” to include a number before each entry and so the headers of the list matched to the columns, as some of them were one tab off. The main reason I did this was so that it was possible to reuse these functions in the edit menus. During this process, I also added a “Press Enter to Continue” prompt at the end of each option before the menu is displayed again, as when I was testing in the console window, many times the menu would push the entire command that was just run off the screen.

When I initially planned the objectives, I had also wanted to fix and re-prompt if invalid data was entered in some of the fields. I still would like to complete these, but due to the way the code is structured, I have not yet found a way to do this efficiently, as the way the code is structured in several places, an input error in any field would throw the same exception. I think I could put each field in its own try-catch block, but that will take more time than I had this week.

My main objective for this artifact was to work on list data structures. I feel that I have learned a lot about working with lists by editing the values in a specific list, however, I feel there is still more to learn, as I have not really worked with deleting from a list. If I have time to continue enhancing this project, I may add delete functions to the code as well. I also learned that it is better to structure the code in smaller sections, even if that increases complexity, as the try-catch blocks can throw an exception at too many points and catching and processing those exceptions is difficult. 

## [Project Two - C++ GUI - OpenGL Scene](https://github.com/bddarwin/opengl-model)

The artifact I chose for this milestone was the final project from CS-330, Computational Graphics and Visualization. This project was a 3D scene made in OpenGL and C++. I took this class two terms ago, in March and April of 2021. The project consists of the code required to draw two buildings on a grass plane. It was originally 929 lines, most of which were just used to draw each of the points and triangles required to draw the buildings. 

I selected this project for my ePortfolio because I believe it is one of the most complete and most complicated projects I have worked on over the course of my degree. I wanted something that showcased a graphical software program and wanted to keep a variety of different languages for my portfolio. This project gave me the best chance to increase the software design course objectives, as it allows me the chance to restructure code into easily reusable functions. 

I know there are glitches in the project, especially with texturing on the roof of both buildings. I also know the code is a mess, with little to no comments, and very repetitive. I feel that it would be far easier to redo the code into functions rather than drawing each triangle individually, and I feel that would significantly reduce the amount of code. Also, when developing the code in the first place, I kept duplicated, commented out code in the project, in case I needed it later. At this point though, that code should be removed.

During the improvements, my first step was to remove all the warnings in my code. Most of these errors were based on converting variables from double to float in certain parts of the code, so I went through and made sure the data types matched. The next improvement I made was going through the code and removing duplicated and commented out lines. This removed approximately 70 lines of unneeded code total. My final, and most significant improvement, was drawing the objects to the screen more efficiently. There are approximately 80 points, and approximately 100 triangles drawn in the project. In the original project, each of these are typed into an array and drawn from that array. The new project reduced this by drawing 5 cubes, one rectangle, and left the rounded roof as the only part of the project that is manually drawn. 

The rectangle drawing function I wrote is used to draw a flat rectangle of any size. It takes the four points as parameters, and then information on the texture to apply, and how many times to repeat the texture across the object. This function does everything to draw the object on the scene. The cube function is like the rectangle function but requires the 8 points for the corners of the object drawn instead. This function just determines the points that are needed to draw each side of the object, and then calls the rectangle drawing function with those points and textures. 

I feel I reached the goals I had set in module one, as the code has been reduced by nearly 200 lines (from 929 to 751), and I have created two functions that have made it far easier to add to the scene as well. In the process of creating these functions, the texture errors from the old code were fixed as well, and the one building is completely drawn using the new functions. I also learned more about the structure of OpenGL code, and what is required and what is optional to include. I also learned how to better handle drawing individual objects, and the new scene draws 32 separate times, instead of the 3 massive draws the original code did, grouping each texture and drawing every object of that texture at once. Over the course of the project as well, I found memory leaks from data not being properly cleared, which has reduced the total memory usage from about 220mb to about 140mb. 

## [Project 3 - Python Web-Based Dashboard](https://github.com/bddarwin/python-dashboard)
The project I chose for this milestone was the Animal Shelter dashboard from CS-340. This project is a HTML dashboard built in Python to read data from MongoDB. The project searches the database for dogs that would be a good fit for rescue programs. The project as developed for the class was outputting raw data from the database with basic filtering options. The main reason I selected this project for my ePortfolio was because it shows the ability to work in multiple different technologies, including web development, databases, and Python. The project looked extremely rough and had significant opportunities for improvement.

My improvements to this project started with filtering relevant data onto the display. I removed unneeded columns from the database, like multiple different date and time fields, and fields like outcome from the shelter case, as those aren’t needed in the data. This gave a more relevant view of the data and allowed the width of the page to fit on a standard 1080p monitor better without a horizontal scrollbar. My next improvement was to edit the header on the document. The header required the company logo in it, plus two lines of a title. In the version of the app that I started with, these were just three separate rows on the screen, which made the vertical scroll cut off most of the data shown. I rearranged the image to the side of the text to make this shorter and bring content like the graph onto the initial view of the page. For the third improvement, I fixed a bug that prevented the graph from updating based on the filters on the data.

I felt this was the hardest project to work on overall, as most of this project involved setting up software on my computer that I had used previously on the SNHU online environment. I had to install anaconda, mongo, python, jupyter, and several other components just to get the code running. The experience of installing and configuring the software felt like I learned more than working on the code. Once I got the software configured, I felt that the code changes were relatively easy. The process of installing and configuring dependencies in an environment is something that I did not think much about during the course of the degree, and I think that is probably something important to have experienced at least this once.
